Document Flutter ios testing support (#3066)
saucelabs/sauce-docs: docs/mobile-apps/automated-testing/flutter/flutter-integration-testing-ios.md

---
id: flutter-integration-testing-ios
title: Flutter iOS
sidebar_label: Flutter iOS
description: Run your Flutter integration tests for iOS
---

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Flutter compiles iOS [integration tests](https://docs.flutter.dev/cookbook/testing/integration/introduction) into [XCTests](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xctest) so that they can be executed on apple devices. In the following we will explain how to run your XCTests on Sauce Labs infrastructure.

> **To run a XCTest (or 'flutter test') on Sauce Labs we need two test artifacts from you:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**To run an XCTest (or 'Flutter test') on Sauce Labs, you need to provide two test artifacts:**
```

Author: I believe 'an' should not be used, if an X follows after.

Reviewer: Yes, it should. It's about the sound and not only the vowels.

> The choice between the indefinite article a and an is made according to how the following word is pronounced (rather than spelt).
The pronunciation of the letter X is “eks”, starting with a vowel “e”. Hence we say an X.
The letter U, however, is pronounced as “you”, starting with a consonant “y”. Hence we say a U.

From: https://oxfordcomma.quora.com/Why-does-an-X-sound-correct-when-X-isnt-a-vowel#:~:text=The%20choice%20between%20the%20indefinite,Hence%20we%20say%20an%20X.

1. Your flutter-iOS app compiled as an `.app` or `.ipa` file.

> 2. The `.xctestrun` file for that app. The [.xctestrun file](https://keith.github.io/xcode-man-pages/xcodebuild.xctestrun.5.html) is the config for your test, this is the same config that xcode uses when it runs your tests on your development machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The `.xctestrun` file for that app. The [.xctestrun file](https://keith.github.io/xcode-man-pages/xcodebuild.xctestrun.5.html) is the config for your test, this is the same config that Xcode uses when it runs your tests on your development machine.
```

## Contents
1. [How to build the '.app' and '.xctestrun' files for your Flutter app.](#1-how-to-build-the-app-and-xctestrun-files-for-your-flutter-app)
2. [How to run the flutter-iOS integration test on Sauce Labs infrastructure.](#2-how-to-run-flutter-ios-integration-tests-on-sauce-labs-infrastructure)
3. [Sample Implementation](#example-implementation)

:::info What You'll Need

- A Sauce Labs account ([Log in](https://accounts.saucelabs.com/am/XUI/#login/) or sign up for
  a [free trial license](https://saucelabs.com/sign-up))
- Your Sauce Labs [Username and Access Key](https://app.saucelabs.com/user-settings)
- Access to Sauce Labs Real Devices. Sauce Labs only supports XCTests on Real Devices, not virtual.
- Flutter mobile app. If you don't have one, you could use our Flutter Demo App:
    - [Sauce Labs Flutter Demo App](https://github.com/saucelabs/my-demo-app-flutter)
- `xcodebuild` tools
- `zip` and/or `saucectl`
:::

## 1. How to build the '.app' and '.xctestrun' files for your Flutter app.

> :::note You need to setup your flutter app for integration tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note You need to setup your Flutter app for integration tests.
```

> Before you build your app, you need to ensure that you have setup the `integration_tests` for your flutter-ios app correctly. You can follow the [flutter documentation](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/tree/main/packages/integration_test#integration_test) to do so, the most relevant section is the part on [iOS Device Testing](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/tree/main/packages/integration_test#ios-device-testing). You can stop following flutters guide after you have executed the `xcodebuild build-for-testing` command. This command will generate the `.app` and `.xctestrun` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you build your app, you must ensure that you correctly set up the `integration_tests` for your flutter-ios app. You can follow the [flutter documentation](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/tree/main/packages/integration_test#integration_test) to do so. The most relevant section is the part on [iOS Device Testing](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/tree/main/packages/integration_test#ios-device-testing). You can stop following Flutter's guide after you have executed the `xcodebuild build-for-testing` command. This command will generate the `.app` and `.xctestrun` files.
```

:::

To execute your xctest, we require your app (which must be packaged together with your XCTests) in '.app' or '.ipa' format. Additionally we need your your `.xctestrun` file, which is the config for your test.

> By default xcode will not persist the `.xctestrun` file if you kick off a XCTest on your development machine. To persist the `.xctestrun` file we need to use the `xcodebuild build-for-testing` command. Make sure you are using the correct `scheme` so it includes your integration tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Xcode will not persist the `.xctestrun` file if you kick off an XCTest on your development machine. To persist the `.xctestrun` file we need to use the `xcodebuild build-for-testing` command. Make sure you are using the correct `scheme` so it includes your integration tests.
```

```shell
# Example of the xcodebuild command to build the application.
# You will need to adjust the args according to your app.
output="../build/ios_integ"
xcodebuild build-for-testing \
  -workspace Runner.xcworkspace \
  -scheme Runner \
  -xcconfig Flutter/Release.xcconfig \
  -configuration Release \
  -derivedDataPath \
  $output -sdk iphoneos

# The .app and .xctestrun files will now be present in your output directory. In this case: `build/ios_integ/Products/Release-iphoneos`
```

## 2. How to run flutter-iOS integration tests on Sauce Labs infrastructure

> To run your flutter XCTest on sauce you have two options: use `saucectl` or integrate with our APIs yourself. If you are unfamiliar with our APIs we recommed using `saucectl` for ease of use and getting you started quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run your Flutter XCTest on Sauce Labs, you have two options: use `saucectl` or integrate with our APIs yourself. If you are unfamiliar with our APIs, we recommend using `saucectl` for ease of use and getting you started quickly.
```

### Run XCTests via saucectl

First install [saucectl](/docs/dev/cli/saucectl.md#installing-saucectl). Then you can use `saucectl` command to configure and run your test on Sauce Labs infrastructure.

```shell

> # if you did not setup saucectl yet, run:
> saucectl configure
> 
> # follow the steps to configure your xctest, with your `.app`/`.ipa` file and the `.xctestrun` test config. Use `Real Device` not `Virtual Device`
> saucectl init xctest
> 
> # run the newly created xctest config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# If it's the first time you're using saucectl, run:
saucectl configure

# follow the steps to configure your XCTest, with your `.app`/`.ipa` file and the `.xctestrun` test config. Use `Real Device` not `Virtual Device`
saucectl init xctest

# run the newly created XCTest config.
```

saucectl run
```

For further configuration options and info on how to use `saucectl` visit [/docs/mobile-apps/automated-testing/espresso-xcuitest/xcuitest.md](/docs/mobile-apps/automated-testing/espresso-xcuitest/xcuitest.md)

### Run XCTests without saucectl

> If you prefer not to use saucectl, you can also directly integrate with our APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you prefer not to use saucectl, you can directly integrate with our APIs.
```

> **First**, you will need to compile your `.app` as an `.ipa` file as described [above](/docs/mobile-apps/automated-testing/ipa-files.md#building-an-ipa-from-an-app-bundle). 
> 
> **Second**, you will need to upload your `.ipa` and `.xctestrun` file to our Storage backend, see [AppStorage APIs](/docs/mobile-apps/app-storage.md#upload-apps-via-rest-api).
> 
> **Third**, you will need to call our native testing API with the AppStorage ids of the two files you just uploaded, see [RDC native /test API](/docs/dev/api/rdc.md#start-a-xctest-xcuitest-or-espresso-job).
> 
> **Fourth**, you will need to poll the state of the job and wait until the `status` is `passed|failed|error|complete`. You can do this through the [Jobs API](/docs/dev/api/rdc.md#get-a-specific-real-device-job).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**First**, compile your `.app` as an `.ipa` file as described [above](/docs/mobile-apps/automated-testing/ipa-files.md#building-an-ipa-from-an-app-bundle). 

**Second**, upload your `.ipa` and `.xctestrun` files to our AppStorage backend, see [AppStorage APIs](/docs/mobile-apps/app-storage.md#upload-apps-via-rest-api).

**Third**, call our native testing API with the AppStorage IDs of the two files you just uploaded. See [RDC native /test API](/docs/dev/api/rdc.md#start-a-xctest-xcuitest-or-espresso-job).

**Fourth**, poll the state of the job and wait until the `status` is `passed|failed|error|complete`. You can do this through the [Jobs API](/docs/dev/api/rdc.md#get-a-specific-real-device-job).
```

  a [free trial license](https://saucelabs.com/sign-up))
- Your Sauce Labs [Username and Access Key](https://app.saucelabs.com/user-settings)
- Access to Sauce Labs Real Devices. Sauce Labs only supports XCTests on Real Devices, not virtual.
- Flutter mobile app. If you don't have one, you could use our Flutter Demo App:
    - [Sauce Labs Flutter Demo App](https://github.com/saucelabs/my-demo-app-flutter)
- `xcodebuild` tools
- `zip` and/or `saucectl`
:::

## 1. How to compile your flutter-iOS app into an '.ipa' file

:::note You need an '.app' and '.xctestrun' file

Before you compile your application into an `.ipa` file ensure that you have setup the `integration_tests` for your flutter-ios app correctly. You can follow the [flutter documentation](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/tree/main/packages/integration_test#integration_test) to do so, the most relevant section is the part on [iOS Device Testing](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/tree/main/packages/integration_test#ios-device-testing). You can stop following flutters guide after you have executed the `xcodebuild build-for-testing` command. This command will generate the `.app` and `.xctestrun` file.
:::

> An `ipa` file is basically just a zip of your `.app` file, where the `.app` is located in a `/Payload` directory, as in: `/Payload/SaucelabsDemo.app`. You can either manually create the `.ipa` file with the following guide, **Or you can let `saucectl` handle this for you automatically**, by passing the `.app` file directly to `saucectl`. **In this case you can skip immediatly to the next section:** [How to generate the `.xctestrun` config file](#2-how-to-generate-the-xctestrun-config-file).

Reviewer 2: I feel that instead of going so in depth on explaining the difference between `ipa` and `app` files, we could just mention that our `saucectl` tool supports both formats. Like "you can either provide the `.app` from your flutter project or an already packaged `.ipa`".

Author: I will point to a different section in our docs on ipa files.

Author: updated, let me know what you think https://docs.dev.saucelabs.net/pr-preview/pr-3066/mobile-apps/automated-testing/flutter/flutter-integration-testing-ios/

```shell
# build your app with xcode according to your app configuration.
# For example:
output="../build/ios_integ"
xcodebuild build-for-testing \
  -workspace Runner.xcworkspace \
  -scheme Runner \
  -xcconfig Flutter/Release.xcconfig \
  -configuration Release \
  -derivedDataPath \
  $output -sdk iphoneos

# Now we create the .ipa file:
# We create the expected /Payload directory, then we copy the `.app` into the /Payload dir and zip everything.
mkdir Payload
cp -r PATH_TO_BUILD_FOLDER/Runner.app Payload
zip -r Runner.ipa Payload
```

> ## 2. How to generate the '.xctestrun' config file.

Author: ```suggestion
## 2. How to generate the '.xctestrun' config file
```

---
id: flutter-integration-testing-ios
title: Flutter iOS
sidebar_label: Flutter iOS
description: Run your Flutter integration tests for iOS
---

import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';
import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Flutter compiles iOS [integration tests](https://docs.flutter.dev/cookbook/testing/integration/introduction) into [XCTests](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xctest) so that they can be executed on apple devices. In the following we will explain how to run your XCTests on Sauce Labs infrastructure.

**To run a XCTest (or 'flutter test') on Sauce Labs we need two test artifacts from you:**

> 1. Your flutter-ios app compiled as an `.ipa` or `.app` file.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Your flutter-iOS app compiled as an `.ipa` or `.app` file.
```

2. The `.xctestrun` file for that app. The [.xctestrun file](https://keith.github.io/xcode-man-pages/xcodebuild.xctestrun.5.html) is the config for your test, this is the same config that xcode uses when it runs your tests on your development machine.

## Contents

> 1. [How to compile your flutter-ios app into an `.ipa` file.](#1-how-to-compile-your-flutter-ios-app-into-an-ipa-file)

Author: ```suggestion
1. [How to compile your flutter-iOS app into an `.ipa` file.](#1-how-to-compile-your-flutter-ios-app-into-an-ipa-file)
```

2. [How to generate the `.xctestrun` config file.](#2-how-to-generate-the-xctestrun-config-file)

> 3. [How to run the flutter-ios integration test on Sauce Labs infrastructure.](#3-how-to-run-flutter-ios-integration-tests-on-sauce-labs-infrastructure)

Author: ```suggestion
3. [How to run the flutter-iOS integration test on Sauce Labs infrastructure.](#3-how-to-run-flutter-ios-integration-tests-on-sauce-labs-infrastructure)
```

4. [Sample Implementation](#example-implementation)

:::info What You'll Need

- A Sauce Labs account ([Log in](https://accounts.saucelabs.com/am/XUI/#login/) or sign up for
  a [free trial license](https://saucelabs.com/sign-up))
- Your Sauce Labs [Username and Access Key](https://app.saucelabs.com/user-settings)
- Access to Sauce Labs Real Devices. Sauce Labs only supports XCTests on Real Devices, not virtual.
- Flutter mobile app. If you don't have one, you could use our Flutter Demo App:
    - [Sauce Labs Flutter Demo App](https://github.com/saucelabs/my-demo-app-flutter)
- `xcodebuild` tools
- `zip` and/or `saucectl`
:::

> ## 1. How to compile your flutter-ios app into an `.ipa` file

Author: ```suggestion
## 1. How to compile your flutter-iOS app into an `.ipa` file
```

:::

An `ipa` file is basically just a zip of your `.app` file, where the `.app` is located in a `/Payload` directory, as in: `/Payload/SaucelabsDemo.app`. You can either manually create the `.ipa` file with the following guide, **Or you can let `saucectl` handle this for you automatically**, by passing the `.app` file directly to `saucectl`. **In this case you can skip immediatly to the next section:** [How to generate the `.xctestrun` config file](#2-how-to-generate-the-xctestrun-config-file).

```shell
# build your app with xcode according to your app configuration.
# For example:
output="../build/ios_integ"
xcodebuild build-for-testing \
  -workspace Runner.xcworkspace \
  -scheme Runner \
  -xcconfig Flutter/Release.xcconfig \
  -configuration Release \
  -derivedDataPath \
  $output -sdk iphoneos

# Now we create the .ipa file:
# We create the expected /Payload directory, then we copy the `.app` into the /Payload dir and zip everything.
mkdir Payload
cp -r PATH_TO_BUILD_FOLDER/Runner.app Payload

> zip -r Payload.zip Payload
> zip -r Runner.ipa Payload

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# This will zip the Payload folder and the resulted file will be Runner.ipa
zip -r Runner.ipa Payload

# or we can do the following 
# create the zip
zip -r Payload.zip Payload
# rename the zip file
mv Payload.zip Runner.ipa 
```

```

> TODO the last zip command smells.

Author: ```suggestion
```

## 2. How to generate the `.xctestrun` config file.

By default xcode will not persist the `.xctestrun` file if you kick off a XCTest on your development machine. To persist the `.xctestrun` file we need to use the `xcodebuild` tool. You can follow [the offical flutter documentation](https://github.com/flutter/flutter/tree/main/packages/integration_test#ios-device-testing) until the `xcodebuild build-for-testing` step, to build your `.app` and `.xctestrun` file.

```shell
# Example of the xcodebuild command to build the application and generate the .xctestrun file.
# You will need to adjust the config according to your app.
output="../build/ios_integ"
xcodebuild build-for-testing \
  -workspace Runner.xcworkspace \
  -scheme Runner \
  -xcconfig Flutter/Release.xcconfig \
  -configuration Release \
  -derivedDataPath \
  $output -sdk iphoneos
```

After the `xcodebuild build-for-testing` command ran sucessfully the `.xctestrun` file will be located in your output directory (`Products/Release-iphoneos` by default). Remember the path to the `.xctestrun` file, we will need it in the next step.

> ## 3. How to run flutter-ios integration tests on Sauce Labs infrastructure.

Author: ```suggestion
## 3. How to run flutter-iOS integration tests on Sauce Labs infrastructure.
```

To run your flutter XCTest on sauce you have two options: use `saucectl` or integrate with our APIs yourself. If you are unfamiliar with our APIs we recommed using `saucectl` for ease of use and getting you started quickly.

### Run XCTests via saucectl

First install [saucectl](/docs/dev/cli/saucectl.md#installing-saucectl). Then you can use `saucectl` command to configure and run your test on Sauce Labs infrastructure.

```shell
# if you did not setup saucectl yet, run:
saucectl configure

# follow the steps to configure your xctest, with your `.app`/`.ipa` file and the `.xctestrun` test config. Use `Real Device` not `Virtual Device`
saucectl init xctest

# run the newly created xctest config.
saucectl run
```

> For further configuration options and info on how to use `saucectl` visit [/docs/mobile-apps/automated-testing/espresso-xcuitest/xcuitest.md](/docs/mobile-apps/automated-testing/espresso-xcuitest/xcuitest.md)

Reviewer 3: we should change the saucectl docs to reflect xctests too, this is something that can make customer confused and open SRs.

Author: yes, we need to find a smart way to do this, I don't want to copy the entire xcuitest config page

Author: done

Author: Thinking about this more, I believe we should not update the doc in the `xcuitest config page`  until we at least support format version 2 of the xctestrun file. 

Otherwise people will assume that we have generic XCTest support and wonder when their XCTests don't work on Sauce.

Reviewer 2: Yeah the confusion would come from the replacement from `appTest` to `xcTestRunFile` parameter in the file and the `saucectl init` command.

Maybe in the part we recommend using `saucectl init` we could give a heads up there. Like `You'll need to provide the test app or ipa file, and the xctestrun file created as described previously. `saucectl init` can be invoked interactive or non interactive. If using non interactive these are the minimum required parameters:`

```
saucectl init --no-prompt -r us-west-1 xctest --xctest-run-file FlutterTest.xctestrun --app FlutterTestApp-resigned.ipa --device name=iPhone,private=true
```

Author: I mention that in this comment: `follow the steps to configure your xctest, with your `.app`/`.ipa` file and the `.xctestrun` test config. Use `Real Device` not `Virtual Device``

### Run XCTests without saucectl

If you prefer not to use saucectl, you can also directly integrate with our APIs.

**First**, you will need to compile your app as an `.ipa` file as described [above](#1-how-to-compile-your-flutter-ios-app-into-an-ipa-file). 

**Second**, you will need to upload your `.ipa` and `.xctestrun` file to our Storage backend, see [AppStorage APIs](/docs/mobile-apps/app-storage.md#upload-apps-via-rest-api).

> **Third**, you will need to call our native testing API with the AppStorage ids of the two files you just uploaded and pass them to `/test`.

Reviewer 3: I was checking the public API we have in the public docs, so far we didn't document this endpoint before. should we announce this ?

Author: yes, this also needs to happen in this MR

**Fourth**, you will need to poll the state of the job and wait until the `status` is `passed|failed|error|complete`. You can do this through the [Jobs API](/docs/dev/api/jobs.md#get-job-details).

## Example Implementation

For a practical example of how to set up and run integration tests for Flutter apps, you can refer to
the [Sauce Labs Flutter demo application](https://github.com/saucelabs/my-demo-app-flutter) repository.
The steps outlined in this guide have already been implemented in that repository. You can follow along with the demo app to see how
everything is configured and run your tests accordingly.

> ## Open questions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Tips for iOS Integration Tests
```

> 1. Select your `Team` for both Targets in the `Signing & Capabilities` section.
> 1. Update your testing dart file `flutter_integration_test.dart` to include the ***tearDownAll***,
>     The purpose for this is to make sure we close the connection to the device after the tests have completed.
>      ```dart
>     // Add as app because we want to make sure the app loaded correctly on the device by calling the main function in the main dart file.
>      import 'package:my_demo/main.dart' as app;
>      void main() {
>     
>        // Ensure IntegrationTestWidgetsFlutterBinding is initialized
>        final binding = IntegrationTestWidgetsFlutterBinding.ensureInitialized() as IntegrationTestWidgetsFlutterBinding;
>     
>     
>        group('E2E Test With Flutter', (){
>          tearDownAll(() async {
>            // Signal that the test is complete
>            binding.reportData = <String, dynamic>{
>              'completed': true,
>            };
>          });
>     
>          testWidgets("Your flutter test", 
>          (tester) async {
>            app.main();
>            await tester.pumpAndSettle(); // wait for app to be ready. 
>           
>            ...
>          });
>        });
>      }
>     ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. ***Set Your Team in Xcode***
   
   To run tests on a real iOS device locally, ensure you select your `Team` in the `Signing & Capabilities` section of Xcode for both targets in your project. This is necessary for proper provisioning and signing.
1. ***Include tearDownAll Method in Your Dart File***

   Add a `tearDownAll` method in your integration test file (eg: flutter_integration_test.dart) to close the connection to the device after tests are complete. This prevents potential resource leaks or connection issues.
   Example :
   ```dart
    // Add as app because we want to make sure the app loaded correctly on the device by calling the main function in the main dart file.
     import 'package:my_demo/main.dart' as app;
     void main() {
    
       // Ensure IntegrationTestWidgetsFlutterBinding is initialized
       final binding = IntegrationTestWidgetsFlutterBinding.ensureInitialized() as IntegrationTestWidgetsFlutterBinding;
    
    
       group('E2E Test With Flutter', (){
         tearDownAll(() async {
           // Signal that the test is complete
           binding.reportData = <String, dynamic>{
             'completed': true,
           };
         });
    
         testWidgets("Your flutter test", 
         (tester) async {
           app.main();
           await tester.pumpAndSettle(); // wait for app to be ready. 
          
           ...
         });
       });
     }
    ```
```

Author: @bahrimootaz please test if the tearDown all is also required for xctest.

Author: thank you for researching this, the tear down method is not required.
